# Results

## Wikidata reconciliation - initial look

Entities from PanglaoDB, that is, cell types, genes, tissue types and organs, were matched with Wikidata items, 
matching summary can be seen on Table @tbl:reconcilesummary. 



|         | # of total items |   # of unique matches  |  % of total items that were matched |
|:--------|---------:|-------------------:|---------------:|
| Cells   |      215 |                 81 |        37.67% |
| Tissues |      246 |                 85 |        34.55% |
| Organs  |       29 |                 22 |        75.86% |
| Human Genes |    58216 |                 35423 |        60.84% |
| Mouse Genes  |    53793 |                 25124 |        46.70% |
Table: Summary of the matched entities from PanglaoDB.
{#tbl:reconcilesummary}

## Analysis of item quality - initial look

Only *Homo sapiens* genes and Organs reconciled more than 50%.
In the case of genes, this is probably due to the Gene Wiki initiative [@doi:10.1093/database/baw015], 
a long-running project to improve biological information in Wikipedia and its sister-projects, including Wikidata. 

This is further illustrated by Figure @fig:gene_alt_ids, in which we can see that all *Mus musculus* gene items - 
and nearly all *Homo sapiens* items - 
analysed had the Entrez ID alternative identifier present - 
Most of the data from the Gene Wiki project came from NCBI, creator and maintainer of Entrez. 
Nevertheless, there are still many gene items without an "Ensembl Gene ID" property, 
showcasing the need for further work in migrating this important source of information.   
In the case of Organ data, there was a high number of matches both due to the fact that there were only a few number of items, but also
since most Organ entities have Wikipedia pages, that are, therefore, cross-linked using Wikidata, requiring the creation of these items. 

Regarding alternative identifiers, what was observed for genes cannot be said for histological entities, 
while there is significant progress in integrating UBERON IDs, there is near to no items with a Cell Ontology ID property (Figure @fig:histo_alt_ids).

![
Percentage of matched histological items that had alternative identifiers,
UBERON IDs for Tissues and Organs, Cell Ontology IDs for Cell types. 
](images/histo_alt_ids.png){#fig:histo_alt_ids}

![
Percentage of matched gene items that had alternative identifiers, Entrez ID and Ensembl Gene ID, divided by species. 
](images/gene_alt_ids.png){#fig:gene_alt_ids}

![
Percentage of reconciled entities, divided by which item type they belong to. Most reconciled items don‘t count with the P31 property.
](images/reconciled_item_types.png){#fig:reconciledbar}

A significant proportion of the matches we could acquire for histological data didn't contain in their data model an "instance of" (P31) property, 
this illustrates an extremely concerning fact: Although we could still match around 30 percent of the data - 
in the case of Cell types and Tissues - 
this data was probably "low-quality", that is, hard to find and even harder to obtain insights from, 
we can affirm this since the P31 property is the basis for most items in Wikidata, 
it's the most intuitive way to perform queries against their database and to annotate their items. 

Furthermore, there is a significant disparity between histological data and gene data: 
while we could only match around 37% of Cell types from PanglaoDB, and of those 55% didn't have P31, 
we matched 60% of *Homo sapiens* genes, and all of them had P31. 
This disparity is not clearly shown when looking exclusively at the number of statements for these items 
(Figures @fig:histo_boxplot and @fig:gene_violin), but it shows there is still a great amount of missing information
for biological data, in particular in regards to cell types.

![
The distribution of the number of statements of the matched histological entities. 
Cell types performed the lowest.
](images/histo_boxplots.png){#fig:histo_boxplot}

![
The distribution of the number of statements for matched gene items, divided by species.
](images/gene_violin.png){#fig:gene_violin}

## Improving Wikidata

- Adding species specific terms

### Adding a new property
### Adding missing items
- TBD

### Improving interoperability
- TBD

## Wikidata reconciliation - final look

After the aforementioned improvements were made, 
data from PanglaoDB was reconciled once again, 
the automatic classification method was able to detect most cell types matches for most cell types on PanglaoDB matches (Table
@tbl:finallook_summary). The non-unique matches are likely due to synonym or very similar aliases used for different cell type concepts. Nevertheless, it is an evidence that our work improved cell type content on Wikidata, and will arguably facilitate the reconciliation of other cell-type related resources.

||  # of total items |# of unique matches  |   % of total items that were matched |
|:-|--------------:|-------------------:|---------------:|
| Cells     | 215 | 173 |80.4651 |
| Tissues   |  246 |63 | 25.6097 |
| Organs    | 29 |18 | 62.0689 |
| Human Genes | 58216 |35423 | 60.8475 |
| Mouse Genes |  53793 |25124 |  46.705|
Table: Summary of matched PanglaoDB entities after improvements were made.
{#tbl:finallook_summary}

Noticeably, the proportion of automatic matches for other entity types (tissues and organs) seems reduced in relation to the first assessment (35% to 25% and 76 to 62%). These entities were not targeted by our work, but as Wikidata is a living resource, modifications in the database, such as reclassification of entities or adding of other similar concepts, may have reduced the performance of our simple reconciler.

## Analysis of item quality - final look

As can be gathered from Figure @fig:finallook_reconciledbar, nearly all cell type items have the appropriate "instance of cell type" statement, with only 4 items still missing said statement and one item being classified as an "instance of gland". 

This is a considerable advance in improving the quality of cell type data in Wikidata, as having this simple statement will make these items easier to find and be expanded upon.

![
Percentage of reconciled entities gathered during the second and final reconciliation, divided by which item type they belong to.
](images/final_look_reconciled_types.png){#fig:finallook_reconciledbar}


## Wikidata SPARQL queries enabled by the integration

Now that the PanglaoDB is released as Linked Open Data, we can make queries that were not possible before, including
federated queries with other biological databases, such as Uniprot [@https://sparql.uniprot.org/sparql]
and Wikipathways [@https://www.wikipathways.org/index.php/Portal:Semantic_Web].
Due to previous similar reconciliation projects, Wikidata already contains information about genes, including their relations to Gene Ontology (GO) terms,
<!-- você decide se quer manter essa parte ou acha que fica muita coisa -->
something that led to the development of an R package, go2cell [@https://github.com/jvfe/go2cell],
that facilitates interconnection between cell types and GO terms via their markers.
<!--  -->

PanglaoDB's integration to the Wikidata ecosystem allows us to ask a variety of questions. The next section headers exemplify such questions.

### "Which human cell types are related to neurogenesis via their markers?"

As expected, the query below retrieved a series of neuron types, such as "[human purkinje neuron](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101404913)" and "[human cajal-retzius cell](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101405091)." It did, however, also retrieved non-neural cell types such as the "[human loop of henle cell](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101405109), a kidney cell type, and "[human osteoblast](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101405044). These seemingly unrelated cell types markedly express genes that are involved in neurogenesis, but that does not mean that they are involved with this process. This reinforces the idea that one needs to be careful when using curated pathways to enrich one's analysis, as false positives abound. 

The molecular process that gene products take part depends on the cell type. The SPARQL query below enables us to seamlessly compare  Gene Ontology processes with cell marker data, providing a fruitful sandbox for generation of hypothesis and exploration of the biomedical knowledge landscape.

<div class="is-hidden" id="three-tab-content">
<h5 class="title is-5" style="text-align:center;"> Query for cell types related to neurogenesis </h5>
<div class="columns is-centered">
<p style="text-align: center">
<iframe width=92% height="500" src="https://query.wikidata.org/embed.html#SELECT%20%3FgeneLabel%20%3FcellTypeLabel%0AWHERE%20%0A%7B%0A%20%20%3Fprotein%20wdt%3AP682%20wd%3AQ1456827.%20%23%20protein%20molecular%20process%20neurogenesis%0A%20%20%3Fprotein%20wdt%3AP702%20%3Fgene.%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%23%20protein%20encoded%20by%20gene%0A%20%20%0A%20%20%7B%3Fgene%20wdt%3AP31%20wd%3AQ277338.%7D%20%20%20%20%23%20gene%20is%20an%20instance%20of%20a%20pseudogene%20%0A%20%20UNION%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%23%20or%0A%20%20%7B%3Fgene%20wdt%3AP31%20wd%3AQ7187.%7D%20%20%20%20%20%20%23%20gene%20is%20an%20instance%20of%20a%20gene%0A%20%20%3Fgene%20wdt%3AP703%20wd%3AQ15978631.%20%20%20%23%20gene%20is%20found%20in%20taxon%20Homo%20sapiens%0A%20%20%0A%20%20%3FcellType%20wdt%3AP8872%20%3Fgene.%20%20%20%20%20%23%20cell%20type%20has%20marker%20gene%0A%20%20%0A%20%20%3FcellType%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FcellTypeLabel.%0A%20%20%3Fgene%20%20%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FgeneLabel.%0A%0A%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FcellTypeLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FgeneLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%0A%7D"></iframe>
</p>
</div>
</div>

### "Which cell types express markers associated to Parkinson`s disease?"

Besides integration with Gene Ontology, Wikidata reconciliation makes it possible to complement the marker gene info on PanglaoDB with information about diseases. This integration is of biomedical interest, as there is a quest for detailing of mechanisms that link genetic associations and the diseases themselves. 

"Disease genes" are often compiled from Genomic Wide Association Studies, which look for sequence variation in the DNA. These studies are commonly blind to the cell types related to the pathophysiology of the disease. In the query below, we can see cell types that are marked by genes genetically associated with Parkinson's disease. Even considering the false positives (as per the previously mentioned multifunctional nature of genes) this kind of overlook can aid domain experts to come up with novel hypothesis. 

<div class="is-hidden" id="three-tab-content">
<h5 class="title is-5" style="text-align:center;"> Query for cell types related to Parkinson's disease </h5>
<div class="columns is-centered">
<p style="text-align: center">
<iframe width=92% height="500" src="https://query.wikidata.org/embed.html#SELECT%20%3FcellTypeLabel%20%3FgeneLabel%20%3FdiseaseLabel%20%0AWHERE%20%0A%7B%0A%20%20wd%3AQ11085%20wdt%3AP2293%20%3FdiseaseGene.%20%20%23%20Parkinson%27s%20disease%20--%3E%20genetic%20association%20--%3E%20gene%0A%20%20%3FcellType%20wdt%3AP8872%20%3FdiseaseGene.%20%23%20Cell%20type%20--%3E%20has%20marker%20--%3E%20gene%0A%20%20%0A%20%20%3FcellType%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FcellTypeLabel.%0A%20%20wd%3AQ11085%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FdiseaseLabel.%0A%20%20%3FdiseaseGene%20%20%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FgeneLabel.%0A%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FcellTypeLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FdiseaseLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FgeneLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%7D"></iframe>
</p>
</div>
</div>

### Which diseases are associated with the markers of pancreatic beta cells?

We can check the cell-type to disease relation in both ways. Scientists that study specific cell types (and not necessarily specific diseases) might be interested in knowing which diseases are related to their cell type of interest. In the sample query below, I looked for the diseases linked to the [human pancreatic beta cells](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q101405087), which play an important role in controlling blood sugar levels. Reassuringly, top hits associated with markers included
[obesity](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q12174) and [type-2 diabetes](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q3025883). Other diseases retrieved, such as [Huntington disease-like 2](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q30990046) don't bear a clear link with sugar function, and might merit a further look by a domain expert to see if there are any hypothesis worth pursuing.

<div class="is-hidden" id="three-tab-content">
<h5 class="title is-5" style="text-align:center;"> Query for cell types related to Parkinson's disease </h5>
<div class="columns is-centered">
<p style="text-align: center">
<iframe width=92% height="500" src="https://query.wikidata.org/embed.html#SELECT%20%3FcellTypeLabel%20%3FdiseaseLabel%20%0A%28COUNT%28DISTINCT%20%3FdiseaseGene%29%20AS%20%3Fcount%29%20%0A%28GROUP_CONCAT%28DISTINCT%20%3FgeneLabel%3B%20SEPARATOR%3D%22%2C%20%22%29%20AS%20%3Fgenes%29%0AWHERE%20%0A%7B%0A%20%20wd%3AQ101405087%20wdt%3AP8872%20%3FdiseaseGene%20.%20%20%20%20%23%20human%20pancreatic%20beta%20cell%20--%3E%20%20has%20marker%20--%3E%20%20gene%0A%20%20%3Fdisease%20wdt%3AP2293%20%3FdiseaseGene%20.%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%23%20disease%20--%3E%20genetic%20association%20--%3E%20gene%0A%20%20%0A%20%20wd%3AQ101405087%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FcellTypeLabel%20.%0A%20%20%3Fdisease%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FdiseaseLabel%20.%0A%20%20%3FdiseaseGene%20%20%20rdfs%3Alabel%20%3FgeneLabel%20.%0A%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FcellTypeLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FdiseaseLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%20%20FILTER%28LANG%28%3FgeneLabel%29%20%3D%20%22en%22%29%0A%20%20%0A%20%7D%0A%0AGROUP%20BY%20%3FdiseaseLabel%20%3FcellTypeLabel%20ORDER%20BY%20DESC%28%3Fcount%29%0A%0A"></iframe>
</p>
</div>
</div>