# Discussion

In this work, we re-released the knowledge curated in PanglaoDB on Wikidata, connecting it to the semantic web. 
Each cell-type/marker statement was added to Wikidata with a pointer to PanglaoDB and a citation of the article, providing proper provenance. 
At the same time, we documented the process of database integration to Wikidata, providing a blueprint for future efforts. 

It is important to note that not all data on PanglaoDB was added to Wikidata. 
Fine-grained, database-specific details were too granular for a general-purpose database like Wikidata (e.g. the sensitivity and specificity attached to each marker-cell type pair). 
Eventhough, these data could be released in RDF format and be connected to independent SPARQL endpoints (as done in the Bio2RDF effort [@wikidata:Q56989268]), we focused on integration to Wikidata to take advantage of the built-in integration with various types of knowledge, as well as the tooling developed by the Wikidata community.  

As described in the methods session, we added species-specific terms to Wikidata for cell types of _Homo sapiens_ and _Mus musculus_ described in the PanglaoDB database. 
The use of species-specific cell-types is necessary because genes in Wikidata are also species-specific, connected to their taxon by the "[found in taxon](http://www.wikidata.org/entity/P703)" properties.
In the biomedical literature, however, genes and cell types are sometimes referred to broadly, in a multi-species or species-neutral way. 
The fuzzy, humane meanings are not always compatible with formalized data models. 
Thus, the reconciliation endeavor is not merely finding the right match on Wikidata, but largely of crafting coherent interpretations of data. 


The complexity of biomedical communication adds to the argument pro-Wikidata. 
Sometimes, as happened for us, it is just impossible to find a suitable term in an existing ontology. 
OBO Foundry ontologies are open to contribution, but require a large investment. 
For starters, one must learn a lot about description logic, a field that is often exotic for biologists and software developers alike. 
Moreover, to contribute, one needs to acquire the tooling.
That includes learning to use GitHub (<https://github.com/>) and Protegé (<https://protege.stanford.edu/>), but also learning community conventions and social norms that are slightly different for every single ontology.
Wikidata bypasses this steep learning curve by providing a web interface which requires little to no previous experience with ontologies and programming. 
The reconciliation process becomes smoother, as if a concept is not previously catalogued, we can add a new one on the fly.

Additionally, knowledge added to Wikidata is not locked in the ivory tower of academia.
Data on Wikidata can be easily reused on Wikipedia, a major source of information for scientists and lay people alike.
Wikipedia's thriving mutualism with academia is well documented. [@wikidata:Q42013239; @wikidata:Q21629969; @wikidata:Q21145331] 
Wikidata information can enhance the quality of articles about life-science subjects in semi-automated ways (as has been done before [@wikidata:Q21503276]).
Thus, Wikidata is  directly connected to the well-established science education platform of Wikipedia, a feature unrivaled by any other structured knowledge system. 

Of course, Wikidata has its limitations.
Concerns with the reliability of Wikipedia are as old as the encyclopedia itself (for a discussion, see <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reliability_of_Wikipedia>) and Wikidata likely shares many of such concerns.
The ontological modelling on Wikidata is often far from perfect, and inconsistencies and logical mistakes abound. [@wikidata:Q27037396].
It has been argued, though, that bio-ontologies generally lack "strict, explicit and well defined semantics" (at least in 2008 [@wikidata:Q21093639]).
While a comprehensive analysis of pros and cons of scientific Wikidata is not available, we extend Don Fallis' view on Wikipedia and argue that Wikidata  has a number of "epistemic virtues (e.g., power, speed, and fecundity) that arguably outweigh any deficiency in terms of reliability." [@wikidata:Q101955295]

This work exemplifies the power of releasing Linked Open Data via Wikidata, and provides the biomedical community with the first semantically accessible, 5-star LOD dataset of cell markers, easily reachable from Wikidata's SPARQL Query Service(<https://query.wikidata.org/>). The work also paves the way for Wikidata reconciling of other databases for cell-type markers, such as CellMarker [@wikidata:Q56984510], labome [@doi:10.13070/mm.en.3.183], CellFinder [@wikidata:Q28660708] and SHOGoiN/CELLPEDIA [@https://stemcellinformatics.org/]). 
The approach we took here can in essence be applied to any knowledge set of public interest, providing a low-cost and low-barrier platform for sharing biocurated knowledge in gold standard format. 

We hope that community will keep improving marker and overall biological content on Wikidata, and that the interlinked marker information will be helpful. We invite the reader to improve information on Wikidata for their favorite cell types, adding markers and a link to the reference works, and make ourselves available for aiding anyone interested in using or editing marker information on Wikidata. 